AMM stands for Automated Market Maker. 

Traditionally, we have relied upon centralized and highly regulated institutions to "make markets". For instance, the New York Stock Exchange makes a market for every stock that can be traded there. They do this by operating what is known as an "order book": a simple piece of software which lists "buy" and "sell" orders for that particular stock. It was literally once a book, which you had to phone them to place an order in. Or, more accurately, you had to phone a licensed stockbroker, who had to phone them to place an order.

Using this traditional method, participants can see the volume of buys and sells (which is why I think Depth Charts are far more powerful than candles), and you can see the "spread" between them. The volume indicates which way the price is likely to move in the slightly longer term. More sell orders? It's likely to fall. More buy orders? It's likely to rise. The "spread" is the price different between the highest buy order for that stock, and the lowest sell order. A market is said to be very "deep" when there is a high volume on both sides of the book, and very "liquid" when there is a "tight spread": i.e. the different between buys and sells is very small.

## Changing the System

Now that we understand how it used to work, we can begin to study what AMMs actually are. Rather than working with a book (which is not efficient on chain: in fact, the gas costs make it essentially unfeasible), markets must be automated using a different method. 

The solution is simple: 

1. Create a pool which is made up of the two tokens you wish to trade, e.g. ETH and DAI. 
2. Require that the product of these two tokens be equal to some constant. 
3. Enable anyone to trade ETH for DAI, or DAI for ETH, by sending what they want to trade directly to the contract. 

The contract will calculate the price at which the trade occurs automatically, adjusting for the way that such a trade affects the ratio. This adjustment is generally called "slippage": the effect on the price that the token is traded at (according to the contract) which your trade has.

What we have described above is now known as a Constant Product Market Maker, the prime example of which is likely [[Uniswap V3]]. If you'd like to learn how to start building on this, we recommend that you [start here](https://uniswapv3book.com/).

We would do well to ask, "Is it better than a book?" As always, the answer depends on your intention and context. Order books are, in some ways, more efficient. They are certainly more capital efficient, because traders often don't have to put up the initial collateral required to enter into a trade.

It is this fact which both makes books more captial efficient, and which makes AMMs "better" in some very important way. Traditional stock exchanges typcially do not settle trades on the same day, but have some T+1 or T+2 or even T+3 system, where trades are settled 1, 2 or 3 days later. This has been roundly abused in any number of ways and - in essence - it allows for informed players to outperform the market via assymetrical information and understanding of how the system works.

AMMs, on the other hand, require that you stump up the collateral you wish to trade with prior to any trade, _because the trade is simultaneous with its settlement_. If you've only ever used DeFi tools, the magnitude of this kind of innovation over what used to be the case may not be very apparent (nor may it be clear how delayed settlement provided interesting opportunities for those in the know). 

And this is exactly the point: putting all your capital where your trading appetite is greatly simplifies the process, makes it more honest and transparent, eliminates certain information asymmetries based on privileged/regulated access to order books and the rules by which they are run, but it decreases the efficiency of how you can use that capital compared to more opaque traditional systems. You tell us which is "better".

## Further Resources

AMMs are not limited to Constant Product Market Makers, but - much like Pools - can be extended in various kinds of ways depending on what your context and intention is. We recommend [this article](https://medium.com/bollinger-investment-group/constant-function-market-makers-defis-zero-to-one-innovation-968f77022159) for further insight into the possible different flavours of AMM now available.

At a slightly higher level than the link above, it's also important to understand that the kinds of token being traded can differ according to the structure of the AMM. Uniswap is simplest to explain: you're just trading one token for another.

Balancer, Compound, YieldSpace, Synthetix and others are arranged slightly differently.

| Service | Kind of Trade |
|--------|--------------|
| Uniswap | ABC <> XYZ |  
| Balancer | ABC <> FGH <> XYZ | 
| Compound | ABC <> cABC  |
| YieldSpace | ABC <> fyABC  |
| Synthetix | sABC <> sXYZ |

Author: cryptowanderer