You have a smartphone and, probably, a smart TV. Now, we want to make "smart wallets". It's great for user experience and security. It gives us a lot more flexibility in terms of what accounts really are and how we can use them.

**Account abstraction is the ability to program the key functionality of your account**.

Currently, you get a twelve or twenty-four word secret phrase (or some other version of a private key) that you must remember at all costs, otherwise you lose your account. The stakes are high and the learning curve steep and scary. Instead of relying only on keys, which are tightly coupled to Externally Owned Accounts (EOAs), we can make all addresses into smart contracts only. This means your account is a smart contract, which can be programmed to provide and protect access in various ways which are much more flexible and do not depend only upon one critical seed phrase.

Making every account into a smart contract only, and removing EOAs, requires pretty deep protocol chanes to Ethereum. Therefore, this work (encapsulated in EIP-4337) has taken a long time, because the scale of changes it represents, and the cascading effects these changes have, are large and fairly unpredictable. In response to this, we have seen various Layer 2 solutions try to adopt EIP-4337 natively: most prominently StarkNet and Optimism.

This highlights how Layer 2s not only provide scale to Ethereum, but also provide dynamic, lower risk environments in which to test potential changes to the core protocol and see how they are used, implemented, and attacked before moving them into production on Layer 1.

[Account Abstraction Panel - Starkware Sessions '23'](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g7_4KxgARvI) - this panel provides some really clear insights into two critical aspects of account abstraction: 

1. "gas abstraction" (i.e. the ability pay fees in a token that is not the network's native token), "pay masters" and the various use cases these enable:
	1. privacy preserving accounts
	2. better onboarding
	3. gaming and other low value context "session keys"
4. "nonce abstraction" (i.e. moving away from linearly incrementing nonces so that I can for e.g. require mutliple signers for big transactions, craft such a transaction and - while waiting for those signers - still use my account for lower value transaction)



[Account Abstraction Security Pyramid](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FrxAdJYhSY8) - technical insights into how to build a wallet that leverages account abstraction and uses it in the context of Hardware Security Modules with particular elliptic curves, or Trusted Execution Environments. This talk is included for an example of the application of Account Abstraction, rather than for specific details on the EIP.